# Building the W3C CSS Validation Service from source

## Preamble

This guide provides a step-by-step walk-through to build and install the [W3C
CSS Validation Service][home] (herein referred to as *CSS Validator*) from its
*source* files. It assumes minimal prior system administration experience, uses
the latest versions and includes all functionality of the validator. The target
Linux distribution is *Ubuntu Precise*, though each step will be similar for
any distribution.

## Installing Ubuntu

*Note*: this section can be skipped if you're already familiar with installing
Ubuntu and/or have a Linux system running.

We will be using a [Vagrant][] managed VirtualBox install as a base system.

1. Download and install Vagrant from a [pre-built package][vagrantdl]
2. From the command line, download an Ubuntu Precise box with:

        vagrant box add precise32 http://files.vagrantup.com/precise32.box

3. Create an instance of Ubuntu Precise with:

        mkdir cssvalidator
        cd cssvalidator
        vagrant init

4. Edit the generated `Vagrantfile` and tell Vagrant to use the `precise32` box:

        config.vm.box = "precise32"

5. Launch the virtual machine:

        vagrant up

Your Ubuntu virtual machine should now be up and running. Confirm by running:

    vagrant ssh

### Optional

If running CSS Validator through a web server (see the [Optional](#optional)
section below), uncomment the following line in the generated `Vagrantfile` to
enable port forwarding:

    config.vm.forward_port 80, 8080

... then reload the virtual machine with:

    vagrant reload

## Installing CSS Validator

### 1. Installing CSS Validator dependencies

1. Install build packages:

        sudo apt-get update
        sudo apt-get install build-essential cvs

2. Install CSS Validator dependencies:

        sudo apt-get install default-jdk ant

### 2. Install CSS Validator

1. Download CSS Validator

        mkdir ~/build
        cd ~/build
        export CVSROOT=":pserver:anonymous@dev.w3.org:/sources/public"
        cvs login
        CVS password: anonymous
        cvs get -r nytrulce 2002/css-validator

*Note*: to install the lastest development version (rather than the latest
 *stable* release), replace the command:

     cvs get -r nytrulce 2002/css-validator

... with:

    cvs get 2002/css-validator

### 3. Install a Java Servlet container

Here, we'll be using Tomcat but the same principles apply to any Java Servlet
container.

1. Install Tomcat

        sudo apt-get install tomcat7

2. Configure CSS Validator to use Tomcat by replacing the following line in
`~/build/2002/css-validator/build.xml`

        <property name="servlet.lib" value="/usr/share/java/servlet-2.3.jar"/>

  ... with

        <property name="servlet.lib" value="/usr/share/java/tomcat-servlet-api-3.0.jar"/>

### 4. Build CSS Validator

To build the CSS Validator WAR file, run:

      cd ~/build/2002/css-validator
      ant

## References

The author would like to thank the CSS Validator Team's [official install
guide][official], which forms the basis of much of this document.

## License

Copyright 2012 Tom Vincent <http://tlvince.com/contact>, licensed under the
[Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported License][cc].

Need to site-wide validate your site? Like beautiful reports? Try
[MarkupValidator][]!

  [cc]: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/
  [home]: http://jigsaw.w3.org/css-validator/
  [vagrant]: http://vagrantup.com/
  [vagrantdl]: http://downloads.vagrantup.com/tags/v1.0.5
  [official]: http://jigsaw.w3.org/css-validator/DOWNLOAD.html
  [markupvalidator]: http://markupvalidator.com
